---
layout: post
description: As 2024 comes to a close, it's time to think about what to expect from 2025.
title: Roadmap for 2025
date: 2024-11-28 00:35 +0000
categories: [Blogging]
tags: [roadmap, personal update]
---
## Intro

I like to think frequently about my future, and I like to plan for things ahead. I have a the habit of setting the bar for myself quite high,
so it's very normal for me to retrospect on my current state and what I can do to improve.

Having that in mind, before end of year I like to think and make a plan for the next year. So here's my roadmap for 2025, so to speak.

## An Overview on 2024

At Critical Techworks, I have the role of Scrum Knight - a developer with the Scrum team accountabilities. This means that I'm not only
responsible for developing code and for delivering features; it also means I'm the Scrum Master of the team.

In 2024, apart from company internal trainings related to my position, I've also given quite a bit of thought about how can the team improve
the way it works, and how the team works together to continuously deliver value. In summary, a lot of my time in 2024 has been related to
the Scrum side of it.

### Getting up to Speed with C++20

C++ is a language that is constantly evolving. This can be both good and bad. Firstly, it can be good because it means the language tries to
evolve with time and with development requirements. However, one of the big downsides is the fact that C++ code written with functionality up
to C++11 standard is, in general, completely different from code written with functionality up to C++20. And even though the C++ standard
committee tries to make sure that the standards are backwards compatible (I'm looking at you, Python), this poses challenges to C++ developers,
and it's important to think about what is important to adopt and what is not.

With this in mind, one of the things I've also been focusing on is trying to understand what has been out there since C++17 (including what has
been introduced in C++20) to make sure I'm able to help the team and my project keep up to date with the recommended and best practices. This
led me to taking an online course on modern C++ approaches, which has already allowed me to bring some changes to the code base, including
the usage of [concepts](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/constraints), which not only makes code easier to read, but also improves
compilation errors to become more understandable, and more important than that, more accurate. For instance, one of the most positive things
one can bring from this is the fact that it enables you to understand that you're not missing a member from the class you're passing as a template
argument - but in fact, the class you're trying to use does not respect the constraints imposed. This in turn can help us developers to prevent
bugs from being introduced, or changing code contracts that are not supposed to be changed.

### Learning Rust

In the last quarter of 2024, I've also started learning Rust. This presented itself as an opportunity to improve as a developer and I think
it's already showing itself to be a good thing. I remember hearing some people mentioning that learning Rust has improved their skills as
C++ developers - and this is something I can resonate with. But we'll get to that later.

## What 2025 Holds

Once of the things I've been missing from 2024 is to continue to grow as a developer; and I have a couple of ideas for 2025 that I want to share
with you.

### Why I Will Keep Learning Rust

Before, I mentioned that in this last quarter of 2024 I've been investing quite a few time in learning Rust. Is this because I'm planning
on moving away from C++ and closer to Rust? No, and it's also not due to the recent news from the
[United States](https://www.techradar.com/pro/us-government-wants-businesses-to-stop-using-c-and-c). My main reason was because I wanted to
expand my comfort zone and continue improving as a developer. And learning a new language can play an important role in that.

But why Rust?

The answer is simple. Because Rust enforces correct memory handling at compile time. This means that to understand Rust you need to understand the
problems it solves and therefore you need to understand memory and how memory works. Anyone who knows how C++ leaves memory management to the developer
(no garbage collector like Java) and understanding how Rust works is already starting to make me a better C++ developer because I've been noticing
that I've been even more aware about memory usage in the application my team develops and in particular in the code I write. Is this going to the stack
or is this going to the heap? Do I really need to allocate memory for this? Do I really need to copy this variable or I can move it instead?

Being more critical and clinical about this is something important and it's something that developers who write code close to the hardware need to
think about. And we can't stop only at understanding how expansive it can be to pass something by value (copying) instead of passing something by
const ref. There's a lot of other things we need to think about as well - even making more use of move captures in lambdas, which is something that
tends to be overlooked.

With this in mind, my plan for 2025 is to keep acquiring more knowledge about Rust and even do a couple of simple side projects in Rust to get
the juices flowing. I hope one year from today I will be able to say that it was a great idea to heavily invest in this.

### Certifications

As a Scrum Knight at CTW, one of the things I did last year was to get the
[PSM I certification](https://www.scrum.org/assessments/professional-scrum-master-i-certification) (Professional Scrum Master), from scrum.org.
One of the plans for 2025 to continue to be able to provide insights about Scrum itself I'm planning on taking the PSD (Professional Scrum Developer).
I don't discard stopping here and I might evaluate in the future to continue my journey on getting certifications related to Scrum (maybe Product Owner,
maybe PSM II, who knows - maybe we'll talk about this next year when thinking about the roadmap for 2026).

For the second semester of 2025 I'm also considering taking the [CPA](https://cppinstitute.org/cpa) (C++ Certified Associate Programmer) certification.
Not because I think it's that important to have a C++ certification, but because I believe it can help me to review a few things and focus on my
_not so strong_ C++ skills. All part of the journey to become a better developer and a better professional.

### Extras

I've been mainly focusing on points I'll be able to take some actions for myself, by myself and with myself. Right now I want to talk about a couple
of other things (some might even be surprising).

#### Personal Website

One of the things I've been wanting to do since a couple of years ago is to become more active on my website. From personal opinion texts on tech
and industry to some updates and insights into my personal pet projects. This article about my roadmap for 2025 is supposed to be the starting point
on that journey. Because there's always a good reason not to do something, and I'm very good at finding excuses for not doing things outside of work.

And I could develop more on this - we could talk about not exercising, not reading more, not going out as often as I should, and so many others.
But I'm planning on talking a bit more about this in the future (maybe) and even give my take on one of the hottest of topics: mental health. Not because
someone asked for it, but because I feel like sharing my personal struggle with generalized anxiety can shed some light on other people and because I
strongly believe we need to start talking more openly about it. And it's not enough to mention the term "mental health" and say things like "it's
important to think about mental health" or "we need to demystify mental health". We need to actually do something towards it and I believe it starts
with people being more open about it and share their own experiences and how that affects them (and everyone around them).

But I digress.

#### Faz Sentido?

This last topic on my roadmap is something that I spent quite a lot of time thinking about whether or not to do. At first, I thought I didn't want the
pressure - or that I had anything different to say, even - but after carefully considering both options (do it or not), I decided to go forward with the
idea.

In one of my company workshops I participated this year (shout out to [André Fontes](https://www.andrefontes.pt/)), in one of the sessions we talked
about different feedback forms. I won't spoil it for anyone (and because I strongly believe his workshops are worth taking), but I ended up having a
feedback session with some other people that participated in the same workshop. And at some point, one person in my group said that they think I should
have a podcast and that they would definitely listen to it. I struggled to take that seriously, but more recently I got a message saying that they were
still waiting for that podcast, and I started considering it more seriously.

Nowadays there's too much podcasts, so why do we need another one? Exactly. That was the question I struggled with more. Why would I want to do a podcast
if I didn't have anything new to add? And that was when I found an answer that surprised me. Maybe it's not about me talking about myself or me talking about
some topic - maybe it's about discussing certain topics with different people. And maybe, even if no one listens to the podcast, maybe it will help me and
the people I interact with during the podcast to grow.

And that's the reason why I decided to create "Faz Sentido?" ("Does that make sense?" in English). This will be a podcast in Portuguese that will be released
on Spotify and where I will from time to time talk about a different topic, often accompanied by someone that I feel like can bring a lot to the table.
These topics will vary and will be about different themes. Some of them related to tech and industry (most of them, probably) and some of them related to
life and what is this all about. The objective is to figure out whether things make sense or not.

I already have some ideas and some episodes pre-aligned. For instance, I will be talking about Competitive Programming with my good friend
[Pedro Paredes](https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~pparedes/) (currently at Princeton), who I participated with in programming competitions at uni. But I couldn't
go around having [Beatriz Cavaleiro](https://pt.linkedin.com/in/beatriz-cavaleiro-a990563a) joining me on the first episode as she was the one who put this
in motion in the first place by challenging me to go beyond what I thought were my capabilities. So stay tuned (yes, pun completely intended) for the first
episode arriving sometime in the first trimester of 2025 (I already have a theme for it, but I'd like for it to be a surprise).

## Outro

I'm actually glad I put my plans to paper. This way, one year from today, I'll be able to own myself accountable for it, and anything mentioned in this long
article that I won't achieve I'll need to explain why that was - not because I own it to whoever might be reading this, but because I own it to myself.

I hope you got to the end of this long post and have been able to take something useful to you. And why not do the same? Why not thinking about what you want
to do for yourself in 2025? Does that make sense?

Talk to you later.

João
